---
layout: post
title: What's with all of these languages?
summary: When starting with web development, particularly when you don't have a mentor in the field, it can be overwhelming to figure out what you need to learn to get your vision out in the world. The purpose of this article is to provide a breakdown of how I chose which coding languages to learn and how I approached learning them.
---

"What's with all of these languages?" is the question I asked myself when I first googled "how do I learn web development?". There are so many languages - HTML, CSS, JavaScript, Java, Ruby, Python, PHP - that half the battle is knowing where to start. There are a number of articles that compare the different languages and provide thoughts on which ones to learn depending on what your interests are. Here is a good one. But before you dive into the details, it's important to have a mental model for bucketing languages together so if someone tells you about a new one, you can tell if it's something you might want to look into or not.

## Front-end vs. back-end languages
In the web development world, the mental model that I've found helpful for thinking about languages is categorizing them as front-end or back-end. Front-end languages are used to create the interface the user sees, while back-end languages are used to interact with databases that store user information. Within each bucket, most of the languages accomplish the same thing just in different ways or with different syntax. All languages, of course, have their strengths and weaknesses, which is why some people choose one over another within a certain bucket. Ruby, for example, has a cleaner syntax relative to PHP. As a result, I prefer Ruby.

With a mental model, you can now make a high level decision about where you want to focus your efforts. Do you love design, and do you want to see your designs on the web? If so, choose to explore front-end languages. Do you love databases and manipulating data? If so, choose to explore back-end languages. Now that you have a mental model, let's play out a scenario to see which languages apply where.

Say you want to create an informational web page for a client. All he or she wants is text and pictures on a page so that he or she can direct potential customers to a great looking site. To create this site, you'd need to know front-end languages, which include HTML and CSS. That's it. HTML would be used for the content itself and CSS would be used to style the content. If you wanted to add complex interactions, such as navigation bar that collapses into a button with a drop down when the user's screen shrinks in size, you could explore JavaScript as well. If your client's website then starts to grow, and he or she decides to add a customers-only area, you'd then need authentication and authorization (a fancy way of saying log in and log out functionality), which would require interacting with a database that stores user information. To add this functionality, you'd use a back-end language, such as PHP, Ruby, or Python. Note that JavaScript has gained popularity as a back-end language as well using various frameworks.

## How to choose specific languages
As I went through the process of choosing which languages to learn, I defined a goal for myself. I knew I wanted to be able to design a nice looking website that could be dynamic. Based on the mental model above, I knew this would require knowledge of both front-end and back-end languages.

The easiest place to start was with the front end, since HTML and CSS are the core languages of the web. I highly recommend that every aspiring web developer learn both at a basic level, even if your passion is the back-end. I say this because the web is about interactions, and without a user interface made with HTML and CSS, there is no way to interact with your audience.

Choosing a back-end language to learn was a different story. I had endless debates with myself about which language I should focus on. PHP, for example, is what 80% of websites are built with, but there aren't widely defined strategies for using PHP, which can lead to a lot of bad code. JavaScript, on the other hand, is the newest shiny object, but it changes so quickly that it can be overwhelming to keep up with the newest framework or library. And so on and so forth with other languages.

After considering the pros and cons, I ended up starting with PHP because it's straight forward for a non-technical person to understand. After learning the basics, I started looking into frameworks, which ease tedious tasks, allowing you to create your ideas more rapidly. I found a PHP framework called Laravel, which seemed like a great option, but for some reason I couldn't wrap my mind around it. Then I discovered Ruby on Rails. I was immediately sold because of the maturity of the framework, the community around it, and the ease of use. The problem was that it was built using Ruby, not PHP. Sad face. So I started learning the basics of Ruby and slowly built up my knowledge so that I could understand the inner workings of the Rails framework. 

## Get started with HTML and CSS, then try out Ruby
Learning web development isn't linear. My experience is proof of that. Keep in mind that even if you know that you want to get to point D from point A, points B and C could be behind point A but will still catapult you to point D once you've taken them. Even though I ended up not pursuing PHP in the long term, for example, I still got value out of the time I spent with the language because I learned the basics of data structures, conditionals, and databases. When I then had to take a step back to learn the basics of Ruby, those principles still applied, just with a different syntax. Now, I'm comfortable in a language that's getting me where I want to go.

As you think about choosing languages so you can get to your goal, I suggest starting with HTML and CSS, as mentioned above. If you're only interested in front-end development, you can stop there or add a bit of JavaScript to your knowledge base as well. If you are interested in back-end development, I suggest starting with Ruby because there are a plethora of tutorials, it's a mature language with a strong community, and Rails is a great framework. If you decide Ruby isn't for you, you'll still have a great understanding of the principles of web development, which will accelerate your learning in any other language.